README.md, before:

# **E-Commerce Database Design**

This repository includes the **database design** and **SQL implementation** for an **E-Commerce Web Application**, created as a practice exercise inspired by concepts from the book **Practical Web Database Design**.

> ⚠️ **Note:** This project is currently under development. The database schema and other components are subject to change.

---

## **Motivation**

This project is part of a mentorship program aims to strengthening our **technical** and **interpersonal** skills to prepare for real-world market requirements.

---

## Project Structure

```
E-Commerce-Database/
├── README.md                     # Project documentation
|── ERD.png                       # Entity Relationship Diagram
|── Relational-Schema.png         # Database Schema
└── DDL_DML/
    |── Shcema.sql                # Database schema (CREATE statements)
    └── Test_Data.sql             # Sample data (INSERT statements)

```

---

## **Table of Contents**

- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [What's Included](#whats-included)
- [How to Browse](#how-to-browse)
- [ERD](#erd)
- [Relational Schema](#schema)
- [Schema DDL](#DDL)
- [Data For Testing](#test-data)
- [Queries](#queries)

---

## **What's Included**

- **Entity-Relationship Diagram (ERD)**.
- **Relational Schema**.
- **Normalization**
- **Denormalization**
- **Schema DDL**
- **Some queries to extract usefull data**
- Notes and explanations on relationships and design choices.

---

## **How to Browse**

All diagrams and SQL code are included directly in this `README.md` file for easy navigation and reading.

---

<h2 align="center" id="erd">ERD</h2>

[![ERD](./ERD.png)](./ERD.png)

The ERD includes core components of an E-Commerce system, such as:

- **Customer**
- **Products**
- **Categories**
- **Orders**
- **Order Details**

---

<h2 align="center" id="schema">Relational Schema</h2>

[![Relational Schema](./Relational-Schema.png)](./Relational-Schema.png)

This schema represents the core structure of a simplified E-Commerce system.  
While the design follows standard relational modeling practices, a small amount of **intentional denormalization** was applied to improve query performance and simplify reporting.

### Explanation:

- The **Order_History** table stores customer names ,total amounts, product informations and subtotal, even though this data also exists in other tables.  
  This avoids expensive joins when generating historical order summaries, this might slower the creating new order process but it could be fixed with a **background task** or **batch task** that runs once or twice a week to avoid this problem.
- Product pricing at the moment of purchase is copied into **Order_Details (Unit_Price)** to preserve price history, even if the product price changes later.

These denormalizations are chosen on purpose for practical advantages in analytics, reporting, and historical accuracy, while keeping the overall schema clear and maintainable.

---

<h2 align="center" id="DDL">Schema DDL</h2>

```sql

-- CREATE DATABASE E_Commerce

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Category(
Category_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
Category_Name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Product(
Product_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
Name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
Description VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
Price DECIMAL(7,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Price > 0),
Stock_QTY INT NOT NULL Check(Stock_QTY > 0),
Category_ID INT NOT NULL,
FOREIGN KEY (Category_ID) REFERENCES Category(Category_ID)
);


CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Customer(
Customer_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
First_Name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
Last_Name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
Email VARCHAR(30) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
Password VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Orders(
Order_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
Order_Date TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_DATE,
Total_Amount DECIMAL(9,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Total_Amount > 0),
Customer_ID INT NOT NULL,
FOREIGN KEY (Customer_ID) REFERENCES Customer(Customer_ID)
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Order_Details(
Order_ID INT ,
Product_ID INT ,
QTY INT NOT NULL CHECK(QTY > 0),
Unit_Price DECIMAL(7,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Unit_Price > 0),
PRIMARY KEY (Order_ID, Product_ID),
FOREIGN KEY (Order_ID) REFERENCES Orders(Order_ID),
FOREIGN KEY (Product_ID) REFERENCES Product(Product_ID)
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Order_History(
order_history_id  SERIAL  PRIMARY KEY,
Order_ID INT NOT NULL,
product_id INT NOT NULL,
Customer_ID INT NOT NULL,
category_id int NOT NULL ,
Customer_Full_Name VARCHAR(40) NOT NULL,
Total_Amount DECIMAL(9,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Total_Amount > 0),
Order_Date TIMESTAMP NOT NULL,
product_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
subtotal DECIMAL(8,2) NOT NULL CHECK(subtotal > 0),
quantity INT NOT NULL CHECK(quantity > 0),
FOREIGN KEY (Order_id) REFERENCES orders(order_id),
FOREIGN KEY (product_id) REFERENCES product(product_id),
FOREIGN KEY (customer_id) REFERENCES customer(customer_id),
FOREIGN KEY (category_id) REFERENCES category(category_id)
)
```

---

<h2 align="center" id="test-data">Test Data</h2>

The database includes comprehensive sample data for testing and development:

All test data respects database constraints:

- ✅ Foreign key relationships
- ✅ CHECK constraints
- ✅ NOT NULL constraints

📄 **View full test data**: [Test_Data.sql](./DDL_DML/Test_Data.sql)

---

## <h2 align="center" id="queries">Queries</h2>

## query to generate a daily report of the total revenue for a specific date.

```sql
SELECT DATE(order_date) AS month,SUM(total_amount) revenue FROM orders
GROUP BY month
HAVING DATE(order_date) = <date>;
```

### Smaple Output

| month      | Revenue |
| ---------- | ------- |
| 2024-11-03 | 699.92  |

---

## SQL query to generate a monthly report of the top-selling products in a given month.

```sql
 SELECT  DATE_PART('MONTH', order_date) AS month, product_id, product_name,
 SUM(quantity) AS quantity, SUM(subtotal) AS revenue FROM order_history
 GROUP BY MONTH, product_id, product_name
 HAVING DATE_PART('MONTH', order_date)=<MONTH>
 ORDER BY revenue DESC
 LIMIT 10;
```

### Smaple Output for October

| Month | Name                | Quantity | Revenue |
| ----- | ------------------- | -------- | ------- |
| 10    | Smartphone X        | 5        | 4499.95 |
| 10    | Laptop Pro          | 3        | 3899.97 |
| 10    | Tablet Ultra        | 3        | 1649.97 |
| 10    | Smartwatch Pro      | 4        | 1119.96 |
| 10    | Vacuum Robot        | 2        | 599.98  |
| 10    | Wireless Headphones | 4        | 449.97  |
| 10    | 4K Monitor          | 1        | 399.99  |
| 10    | Winter Jacket       | 3        | 299.98  |
| 10    | Mechanical Keyboard | 2        | 259.98  |
| 10    | Coffee Maker Pro    | 3        | 239.98  |

---

## SQL query to retrieve a list of customers who have placed orders totaling more than $500 in the past month (Include customer names and their total order amounts).

```sql

SELECT CONCAT(C.first_name, ' ', C.last_name) AS full_name, SUM(O.total_amount) AS total_amount FROM
customer C JOIN orders O ON C.customer_id = O.customer_id
GROUP BY name, DATE_PART('month', O.order_date)
HAVING SUM(O.total_amount) > 500 AND  DATE_PART('month', O.order_date) = DATE_PART('MONTH', CURRENT_DATE) - Interval
ORDER BY total_amount DESC;
```

### Same result but getting the benifit of denormalization we applied erlier.

```sql
SELECT customer_full_name AS full_name, SUM(total_amount) total_amount FROM order_history
GROUP BY full_name, DATE_PART('month', order_date)
HAVING SUM(total_amount) > 500 AND  DATE_PART('month', order_date) = DATE_PART('MONTH', CURRENT_DATE) - Interval
ORDER BY total_amount DESC;
```

### Smaple Output

| Full Name        | Total Amount |
| ---------------- | ------------ |
| John Smith       | 3789.94      |
| Sarah Johnson    | 2759.79      |
| Robert Miller    | 2394.92      |
| Emily Brown      | 2138.92      |
| Linda Thomas     | 1064.97      |
| William Wilson   | 869.90       |
| James Martinez   | 819.94       |
| David Jones      | 774.85       |
| Michael Williams | 679.85       |
| Lisa Garcia      | 559.90       |

---

## ## SQL query to search for all products containing a certain keyword in either the product name or description.

```sql
SELECT name, Description FROM Product
WHERE name ILIKE '%' || keyword || '%'
   OR Description ILIKE '%' || keyword || '%'
```

> ⚠️ **Note:** This query performs a sequential scan because the pattern starts with a wildcard (%).
> Although it works correctly, it may become slow on large tables.
> This will optimized later on.

---

## Query to suggest popular products in the same category, excluding the Purchased products by the current customer from the recommendations.

```SQL
SELECT product_id, name, description, category_id FROM product
WHERE product_id NOT IN
(SELECT Product_ID FROM order_history WHERE customer_id = <customer_id>)
AND category_id IN
(SELECT category_id FROM order_history WHERE customer_id = <cusotmer_ID>)
```

## Procedure with transaction to create new order.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE SP_NEW_ORDER(
P_CUSTOMER_ID INT,
P_PRODUCTS JSONB
)

LANGUAGE PLPGSQL
AS $$
DECLARE
V_ORDER_ID INT;
V_TOTAL NUMERIC:=0;
V_STOCK INT;
V_ITEM RECORD;
V_PRICE NUMERIC;
BEGIN
	-- CHECKS FOR CUSTOMER EXISTENCE (EDGE CASE FOR DATABASE ACCESS).
	PERFORM 1 FROM CUSTOMER WHERE CUSTOMER_ID=P_CUSTOMER_ID;
	IF NOT FOUND THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'CUSTOMER NOT FOUND'; END IF;

	-- CREATING THE NEW ORDER (LOCKING THE NEW ROW UNTILL THE TRANSACTION COMMITS) AND RECIEVING THE NEW ORDER_ID
	INSERT INTO orders (customer_id,order_date,total_amount)
	VALUES (P_CUSTOMER_ID, CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,1) RETURNING ORDER_ID INTO V_ORDER_ID;

	-- Looping over the products input.
	FOR V_ITEM IN SELECT PRODUCT_ID, QUANTITY FROM JSONB_TO_RECORDSET(P_PRODUCTS) AS (PRODUCT_ID INT,QUANTITY INT) LOOP

	IF V_ITEM.QUANTITY < 1 THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'INVALID ORDER QUANTITY.'; END IF;

	SELECT PRICE, STOCK_QTY INTO V_PRICE,V_STOCK FROM PRODUCT WHERE PRODUCT_ID =V_ITEM.PRODUCT_ID FOR UPDATE;
	IF NOT FOUND THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'PRODUCT NOT FOUND.'; END IF;

	IF V_ITEM.QUANTITY > V_STOCK THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'LOW STOCK QUANTITY.'; END IF;

	-- for each product in the order there is a row in the order_details table.
	INSERT INTO order_details(ORDER_ID,PRODUCT_ID,QTY,UNIT_PRICE)
	VALUES(V_ORDER_ID, V_ITEM.PRODUCT_ID, V_ITEM.QUANTITY, V_PRICE);

	UPDATE PRODUCT SET STOCK_QTY = STOCK_QTY - V_ITEM.QUANTITY WHERE PRODUCT_ID= V_ITEM.PRODUCT_ID;
	V_TOTAL := V_TOTAL + (V_PRICE*V_ITEM.QUANTITY);
	END LOOP;

	-- Updating the total amount of the order
	UPDATE ORDERS SET TOTAL_AMOUNT=V_TOTAL WHERE ORDER_ID = V_ORDER_ID;
END;
$$;
```

---

## Trigger automatically generates a order history record after insertion in (Order_Details) table.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION FN_CREATE_ORDER_HISTORY_AFTER_ORDER_DETAILS_INERTION()
RETURNS TRIGGER
LANGUAGE PLPGSQL
AS $$
BEGIN
  -- INSERTING TOTAL_AMOUNT = 1 BECOUSE THE TOTAL AMOUNT IS NOT YET CALCULATED IN THE TRANSACTION.
	INSERT INTO order_history(order_id, product_id, category_id, customer_id, customer_full_name, total_amount, order_date,product_name, subtotal, quantity)
	SELECT NEW.ORDER_ID, NEW.PRODUCT_ID, P.CATEGORY_ID, C.CUSTOMER_ID, C.FIRST_NAME || ' ' || C.LAST_NAME AS CUSTOMER_FULL_NAME
	, 1, O.ORDER_DATE, P.NAME, (NEW.QTY*NEW.UNIT_PRICE) AS SUBTOTAL, NEW.QTY
	FROM PRODUCT P, ORDERS O JOIN CUSTOMER C ON C.CUSTOMER_ID=O.CUSTOMER_ID
	WHERE P.PRODUCT_ID=NEW.PRODUCT_ID AND O.ORDER_ID = NEW.ORDER_ID;
	RETURN NULL;
END;
$$;

CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER TG_AFTER_INSERT_ORDER_DETAILS
AFTER INSERT ON ORDER_DETAILS
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE FUNCTION FN_CREATE_ORDER_HISTORY_AFTER_ORDER_DETAILS_INSERTION();
```

---

## Trigger automatically updates total_amount column in order history table after the (total_amount) column in (orders) table is updated.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION FN_UPDATE_ORDER_HISTORY_TOTAL_AFTER_ORDER_UPDATE()
RETURNS TRIGGER
LANGUAGE PLPGSQL
AS $$
BEGIN
	UPDATE ORDER_HISTORY SET TOTAL_AMOUNT = NEW.TOTAL_AMOUNT WHERE ORDER_ID=NEW.ORDER_ID;
	RETURN NULL;
END;
$$;

CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER TR_AFTER_TOTAL_AMOUNT_UPDATE
AFTER UPDATE OF TOTAL_AMOUNT ON ORDERS
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE FUNCTION FN_UPDATE_ORDER_HISTORY_TOTAL_AFTER_ORDER_UPDATE();
```

> **NOTE:** This trigger completes the **TG_AFTER_INSERT_ORDER_DETAILS** both of them are fired within the same transaction.

---

## Transaction query to lock the field quantity for a gevin product_id from being updated.

```sql
BEGIN;
SELECT product_id FROM product WHERE product_id= <product_id> FOR UPDATE;
COMMIT;
```

---

## Transaction query to lock row for a gevin product_id from being updated.

```sql
BEGIN;
SELECT * FROM product WHERE product_id= <product_id> FOR UPDATE;
COMMIT;
```

---

## **Contact**

For questions or feedback:

- GitHub: [@AbdallaSamirKhalifa](https://github.com/AbdallaSamirKhalifa)
- Email: abdallasamirkhalifa@gmail.com

Commit message:

Created: full text search index.

README.md, after:

# **E-Commerce Database Design**

This repository includes the **database design** and **SQL implementation** for an **E-Commerce Web Application**, created as a practice exercise inspired by concepts from the book **Practical Web Database Design**.

> ⚠️ **Note:** This project is currently under development. The database schema and other components are subject to change.

---

## **Motivation**

This project is part of a mentorship program aims to strengthening our **technical** and **interpersonal** skills to prepare for real-world market requirements.

---

## Project Structure

```
E-Commerce-Database/
├── README.md                     # Project documentation
|── ERD.png                       # Entity Relationship Diagram
|── Relational-Schema.png         # Database Schema
└── DDL_DML/
    |── Shcema.sql                # Database schema (CREATE statements)
    └── Test_Data.sql             # Sample data (INSERT statements)

```

---

## **Table of Contents**

- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [What's Included](#whats-included)
- [How to Browse](#how-to-browse)
- [ERD](#erd)
- [Relational Schema](#schema)
- [Schema DDL](#DDL)
- [Data For Testing](#test-data)
- [Queries](#queries)

---

## **What's Included**

- **Entity-Relationship Diagram (ERD)**.
- **Relational Schema**.
- **Normalization**
- **Denormalization**
- **Schema DDL**
- **Some queries to extract usefull data**
- Notes and explanations on relationships and design choices.

---

## **How to Browse**

All diagrams and SQL code are included directly in this `README.md` file for easy navigation and reading.

---

<h2 align="center" id="erd">ERD</h2>

[![ERD](./ERD.png)](./ERD.png)

The ERD includes core components of an E-Commerce system, such as:

- **Customer**
- **Products**
- **Categories**
- **Orders**
- **Order Details**

---

<h2 align="center" id="schema">Relational Schema</h2>

[![Relational Schema](./Relational-Schema.png)](./Relational-Schema.png)

This schema represents the core structure of a simplified E-Commerce system.  
While the design follows standard relational modeling practices, a small amount of **intentional denormalization** was applied to improve query performance and simplify reporting.

### Explanation:

- The **Order_History** table stores customer names ,total amounts, product informations and subtotal, even though this data also exists in other tables.  
  This avoids expensive joins when generating historical order summaries, this might slower the creating new order process but it could be fixed with a **background task** or **batch task** that runs once or twice a week to avoid this problem.
- Product pricing at the moment of purchase is copied into **Order_Details (Unit_Price)** to preserve price history, even if the product price changes later.

These denormalizations are chosen on purpose for practical advantages in analytics, reporting, and historical accuracy, while keeping the overall schema clear and maintainable.

---

<h2 align="center" id="DDL">Schema DDL</h2>

```sql

-- CREATE DATABASE E_Commerce

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Category(
Category_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
Category_Name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Product(
Product_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
Name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
Description VARCHAR(50) NOT NULL,
Price DECIMAL(7,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Price > 0),
Stock_QTY INT NOT NULL Check(Stock_QTY > 0),
Category_ID INT NOT NULL,
FOREIGN KEY (Category_ID) REFERENCES Category(Category_ID)
);


CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Customer(
Customer_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
First_Name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
Last_Name VARCHAR(20) NOT NULL,
Email VARCHAR(30) UNIQUE NOT NULL,
Password VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Orders(
Order_ID INT PRIMARY KEY,
Order_Date TIMESTAMP DEFAULT CURRENT_DATE,
Total_Amount DECIMAL(9,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Total_Amount > 0),
Customer_ID INT NOT NULL,
FOREIGN KEY (Customer_ID) REFERENCES Customer(Customer_ID)
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Order_Details(
Order_ID INT ,
Product_ID INT ,
QTY INT NOT NULL CHECK(QTY > 0),
Unit_Price DECIMAL(7,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Unit_Price > 0),
PRIMARY KEY (Order_ID, Product_ID),
FOREIGN KEY (Order_ID) REFERENCES Orders(Order_ID),
FOREIGN KEY (Product_ID) REFERENCES Product(Product_ID)
);

CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS Order_History(
order_history_id  SERIAL  PRIMARY KEY,
Order_ID INT NOT NULL,
product_id INT NOT NULL,
Customer_ID INT NOT NULL,
category_id int NOT NULL ,
Customer_Full_Name VARCHAR(40) NOT NULL,
Total_Amount DECIMAL(9,2) NOT NULL CHECK(Total_Amount > 0),
Order_Date TIMESTAMP NOT NULL,
product_name VARCHAR(30) NOT NULL,
subtotal DECIMAL(8,2) NOT NULL CHECK(subtotal > 0),
quantity INT NOT NULL CHECK(quantity > 0),
FOREIGN KEY (Order_id) REFERENCES orders(order_id),
FOREIGN KEY (product_id) REFERENCES product(product_id),
FOREIGN KEY (customer_id) REFERENCES customer(customer_id),
FOREIGN KEY (category_id) REFERENCES category(category_id)
)
```

---

<h2 align="center" id="test-data">Test Data</h2>

The database includes comprehensive sample data for testing and development:

All test data respects database constraints:

- ✅ Foreign key relationships
- ✅ CHECK constraints
- ✅ NOT NULL constraints

📄 **View full test data**: [Test_Data.sql](./DDL_DML/Test_Data.sql)

---

## <h2 align="center" id="queries">Queries</h2>

## query to generate a daily report of the total revenue for a specific date.

```sql
SELECT DATE(order_date) AS month,SUM(total_amount) revenue FROM orders
GROUP BY month
HAVING DATE(order_date) = <date>;
```

### Smaple Output

| month      | Revenue |
| ---------- | ------- |
| 2024-11-03 | 699.92  |

---

## SQL query to generate a monthly report of the top-selling products in a given month.

```sql
 SELECT  DATE_PART('MONTH', order_date) AS month, product_id, product_name,
 SUM(quantity) AS quantity, SUM(subtotal) AS revenue FROM order_history
 GROUP BY MONTH, product_id, product_name
 HAVING DATE_PART('MONTH', order_date)=<MONTH>
 ORDER BY revenue DESC
 LIMIT 10;
```

### Smaple Output for October

| Month | Name                | Quantity | Revenue |
| ----- | ------------------- | -------- | ------- |
| 10    | Smartphone X        | 5        | 4499.95 |
| 10    | Laptop Pro          | 3        | 3899.97 |
| 10    | Tablet Ultra        | 3        | 1649.97 |
| 10    | Smartwatch Pro      | 4        | 1119.96 |
| 10    | Vacuum Robot        | 2        | 599.98  |
| 10    | Wireless Headphones | 4        | 449.97  |
| 10    | 4K Monitor          | 1        | 399.99  |
| 10    | Winter Jacket       | 3        | 299.98  |
| 10    | Mechanical Keyboard | 2        | 259.98  |
| 10    | Coffee Maker Pro    | 3        | 239.98  |

---

## SQL query to retrieve a list of customers who have placed orders totaling more than $500 in the past month (Include customer names and their total order amounts).

```sql

SELECT CONCAT(C.first_name, ' ', C.last_name) AS full_name, SUM(O.total_amount) AS total_amount FROM
customer C JOIN orders O ON C.customer_id = O.customer_id
GROUP BY name, DATE_PART('month', O.order_date)
HAVING SUM(O.total_amount) > 500 AND  DATE_PART('month', O.order_date) = DATE_PART('MONTH', CURRENT_DATE) - Interval
ORDER BY total_amount DESC;
```

### Same result but getting the benifit of denormalization we applied erlier.

```sql
SELECT customer_full_name AS full_name, SUM(total_amount) total_amount FROM order_history
GROUP BY full_name, DATE_PART('month', order_date)
HAVING SUM(total_amount) > 500 AND  DATE_PART('month', order_date) = DATE_PART('MONTH', CURRENT_DATE) - Interval
ORDER BY total_amount DESC;
```

### Smaple Output

| Full Name        | Total Amount |
| ---------------- | ------------ |
| John Smith       | 3789.94      |
| Sarah Johnson    | 2759.79      |
| Robert Miller    | 2394.92      |
| Emily Brown      | 2138.92      |
| Linda Thomas     | 1064.97      |
| William Wilson   | 869.90       |
| James Martinez   | 819.94       |
| David Jones      | 774.85       |
| Michael Williams | 679.85       |
| Lisa Garcia      | 559.90       |

---

## SQL query to search for all products containing a certain keyword in either the product name or description.

```sql
SELECT name, Description FROM Product
WHERE name ILIKE '%' || keyword || '%'
   OR Description ILIKE '%' || keyword || '%'
```

> ⚠️ **Note:** This query performs a sequential scan because the pattern starts with a wildcard (%).
> Although it works correctly, it may become slow on large tables.
> This will optimized later on.

### Alternative way of searching for keyword in POSTGRESQL

```sql
ALTER TABLE PRODUCT ADD COLUMN SEARCH_VECTOR TSVECTOR
GENERATED ALWAYS AS (TO_TSVECTOR('english', name||' '||description)) stored;

CREATE INDEX IDX_FULL_TEXT_SEARCH ON PRODUCT USING GIN (SEARCH_VECTOR);

EXPLAIN ANALYSE
SELECT product_id, name, description FROM PRODUCT WHERE SEARCH_VECTOR @@ TO_TSQUERY('fit');

```

- Creating a column combines the fields we need to search in.
- Creating a **GIN** (Generated Inverted Index) which is the most prefered for **Full Text Search**.
- > We might create an index over the **ts_vector** expression but for this way we must use the same expression to search for text, however, denormalization could be beneficial sometimes.

---

## Query to suggest popular products in the same category, excluding the Purchased products by the current customer from the recommendations.

```SQL
SELECT product_id, name, description, category_id FROM product
WHERE product_id NOT IN
(SELECT Product_ID FROM order_history WHERE customer_id = <customer_id>)
AND category_id IN
(SELECT category_id FROM order_history WHERE customer_id = <cusotmer_ID>)
```

---

## Procedure with transaction to create new order.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE PROCEDURE SP_NEW_ORDER(
P_CUSTOMER_ID INT,
P_PRODUCTS JSONB
)

LANGUAGE PLPGSQL
AS $$
DECLARE
V_ORDER_ID INT;
V_TOTAL NUMERIC:=0;
V_STOCK INT;
V_ITEM RECORD;
V_PRICE NUMERIC;
BEGIN
	-- CHECKS FOR CUSTOMER EXISTENCE (EDGE CASE FOR DATABASE ACCESS).
	PERFORM 1 FROM CUSTOMER WHERE CUSTOMER_ID=P_CUSTOMER_ID;
	IF NOT FOUND THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'CUSTOMER NOT FOUND'; END IF;

	-- CREATING THE NEW ORDER (LOCKING THE NEW ROW UNTILL THE TRANSACTION COMMITS) AND RECIEVING THE NEW ORDER_ID
	INSERT INTO orders (customer_id,order_date,total_amount)
	VALUES (P_CUSTOMER_ID, CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,1) RETURNING ORDER_ID INTO V_ORDER_ID;

	-- Looping over the products input.
	FOR V_ITEM IN SELECT PRODUCT_ID, QUANTITY FROM JSONB_TO_RECORDSET(P_PRODUCTS) AS (PRODUCT_ID INT,QUANTITY INT) LOOP

	IF V_ITEM.QUANTITY < 1 THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'INVALID ORDER QUANTITY.'; END IF;

	SELECT PRICE, STOCK_QTY INTO V_PRICE,V_STOCK FROM PRODUCT WHERE PRODUCT_ID =V_ITEM.PRODUCT_ID FOR UPDATE;
	IF NOT FOUND THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'PRODUCT NOT FOUND.'; END IF;

	IF V_ITEM.QUANTITY > V_STOCK THEN RAISE EXCEPTION 'LOW STOCK QUANTITY.'; END IF;

	-- for each product in the order there is a row in the order_details table.
	INSERT INTO order_details(ORDER_ID,PRODUCT_ID,QTY,UNIT_PRICE)
	VALUES(V_ORDER_ID, V_ITEM.PRODUCT_ID, V_ITEM.QUANTITY, V_PRICE);

	UPDATE PRODUCT SET STOCK_QTY = STOCK_QTY - V_ITEM.QUANTITY WHERE PRODUCT_ID= V_ITEM.PRODUCT_ID;
	V_TOTAL := V_TOTAL + (V_PRICE*V_ITEM.QUANTITY);
	END LOOP;

	-- Updating the total amount of the order
	UPDATE ORDERS SET TOTAL_AMOUNT=V_TOTAL WHERE ORDER_ID = V_ORDER_ID;
END;
$$;
```

---

## Trigger automatically generates a order history record after insertion in (Order_Details) table.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION FN_CREATE_ORDER_HISTORY_AFTER_ORDER_DETAILS_INERTION()
RETURNS TRIGGER
LANGUAGE PLPGSQL
AS $$
BEGIN
  -- INSERTING TOTAL_AMOUNT = 1 BECOUSE THE TOTAL AMOUNT IS NOT YET CALCULATED IN THE TRANSACTION.
	INSERT INTO order_history(order_id, product_id, category_id, customer_id, customer_full_name, total_amount, order_date,product_name, subtotal, quantity)
	SELECT NEW.ORDER_ID, NEW.PRODUCT_ID, P.CATEGORY_ID, C.CUSTOMER_ID, C.FIRST_NAME || ' ' || C.LAST_NAME AS CUSTOMER_FULL_NAME
	, 1, O.ORDER_DATE, P.NAME, (NEW.QTY*NEW.UNIT_PRICE) AS SUBTOTAL, NEW.QTY
	FROM PRODUCT P, ORDERS O JOIN CUSTOMER C ON C.CUSTOMER_ID=O.CUSTOMER_ID
	WHERE P.PRODUCT_ID=NEW.PRODUCT_ID AND O.ORDER_ID = NEW.ORDER_ID;
	RETURN NULL;
END;
$$;

CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER TG_AFTER_INSERT_ORDER_DETAILS
AFTER INSERT ON ORDER_DETAILS
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE FUNCTION FN_CREATE_ORDER_HISTORY_AFTER_ORDER_DETAILS_INSERTION();
```

---

## Trigger automatically updates total_amount column in order history table after the (total_amount) column in (orders) table is updated.

```sql
CREATE OR REPLACE FUNCTION FN_UPDATE_ORDER_HISTORY_TOTAL_AFTER_ORDER_UPDATE()
RETURNS TRIGGER
LANGUAGE PLPGSQL
AS $$
BEGIN
	UPDATE ORDER_HISTORY SET TOTAL_AMOUNT = NEW.TOTAL_AMOUNT WHERE ORDER_ID=NEW.ORDER_ID;
	RETURN NULL;
END;
$$;

CREATE OR REPLACE TRIGGER TR_AFTER_TOTAL_AMOUNT_UPDATE
AFTER UPDATE OF TOTAL_AMOUNT ON ORDERS
FOR EACH ROW
EXECUTE FUNCTION FN_UPDATE_ORDER_HISTORY_TOTAL_AFTER_ORDER_UPDATE();
```

> **NOTE:** This trigger completes the **TG_AFTER_INSERT_ORDER_DETAILS** both of them are fired within the same transaction.

---

## Transaction query to lock the field quantity for a gevin product_id from being updated.

```sql
BEGIN;
SELECT product_id FROM product WHERE product_id= <product_id> FOR UPDATE;
COMMIT;
```

---

## Transaction query to lock row for a gevin product_id from being updated.

```sql
BEGIN;
SELECT * FROM product WHERE product_id= <product_id> FOR UPDATE;
COMMIT;
```

---

## **Contact**

For questions or feedback:

- GitHub: [@AbdallaSamirKhalifa](https://github.com/AbdallaSamirKhalifa)
- Email: abdallasamirkhalifa@gmail.com
